# Retinal-Scan-Multi-Disease-Classifier
This project builds and implements deep learning and machine learning techniques to analyze retinal scans. The scans are annotated for the presence of multiple eye diseases. In addition to disease annotations, each scan is labeled as either healthy or unhealthy. Scans with no diseases present are labeled as healthy. Scans with at least one disease present are labeled as unhealthy. Note that an unhealthy scan may be associated with multiple diseases simultaneously. This project builds a binary classifier (implemented using a CNN) that distinguishes between healthy and unhealthy retinal scans. Scans with a probability score greater than or equal to 0.5 are identified as being unhealthy. Furthermore, this project also builds a multi-label classifier that identifies which specific eye diseases are present in a scan known to be diseased. Both deep learning (using TensorFlow and Keras) and machine learning (using scikit-learn) approaches were implemented to do the multi-label classification.

# Deep Learning
Two different approaches were employed to achieve the multi-label classification task with deep learning. The first approach involved using the Binary Relevance method from the scikit-multilearn library. This technique decomposes the multi-label task into multiple independent binary classification problems—training a separate CNN for each disease. F1 threshold maximization was employed for each individual classifier to find the optimal threshold for identifying each disease. <br /> <br /> The second approach involved building a multi-label classifier (implemented using a single CNN) specifically designed for multi-label classification. The single CNN has multiple neurons in the output layer—one for each disease—that are activated by the sigmoid function to produce independent probabilities for each disease. For this approach, a scan is identified as having a disease if its probability score is greater than or equal to 0.5 for that disease.

# Machine Learning
To achieve the multi-label classification task with machine learning the Binary Relevance method from the scikit-multilearn library was employed. This technique decomposes the multi-label task into multiple independent binary classification problems—training a separate SVM or RF for each disease. F1 threshold maximization was employed for each individual classifier to find the optimal threshold for identifying each disease. <br /> <br />
This project showcases the use of Python, Deep Learning (TensorFlow and Keras), and Machine Learning (scikit-learn) to great effect.
 
